Add VPC site-to-site tutorial (#501)
hetzneronline/community-content: tutorials/vpc-with-wireguard-pfsense/01.en.md

- [Set up OpenVPN](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/openvpn-ra.html) for the admin user

## Step 4 - Setting up WireGuard site-to-site connection

In this step, we will install WireGuard on both of the pfSense instances - on-prem as well as VPC. [WireGuard](https://www.wireguard.com/) is a kernel module and it aims to be a modern, secure, high performance yet leaner VPN compared to OpenVPN, IPSec, etc.

**Please note** that there has been [some controversy](https://www.netgate.com/blog/painful-lessons-learned-in-security-and-community) around Netgate's WireGuard implementation in the past. The current kmod-plugin for FreeBSD (what the [pfSense](https://github.com/pfsense/FreeBSD-ports/tree/devel/net/pfSense-pkg-WireGuard) uses in turn) is developed by the [same guy](https://git.zx2c4.com/wireguard-freebsd/) who maintains the Linux kmod. At the time of writing this, *wireguard-freebsd* is marked as *experimental* and has yet to see a 1.0 release. That said, in it's current state it already works well and I presume it only gets better with time.

> ### Overview
> 
> 1. Install the wireguard package on both pfSense instances
> 2. Set up the server on both instances
> 3. Add firewall rules to allow traffic on the wireguard interface
> 4. Set up a peer (client) witch on each instance "dials" into the other pfSense
> 5. Add interfaces and gateways - this should bring up the tunnel
> 6. Set up static routes
> 7. Disable NAT translation
> 8. Deploy a test VM, setup the default route, install `iperf3` and test the tunnel's performance
> 
> Follow the [official guide](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/wireguard-s2s.html); you will see the same addresses there. It is recommended to use an address segment outside our *Example Corp* network. Further, it is recommended to set up a [Pre Shared Key](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/vpn/wireguard/settings.html#wireguard-tunnel-settings).
> 
> ### Remarks
> 
> To clarify the guide from pfSense, make sure to follow all steps on both of your pfSense instances. The following only shows the steps on VPC but they are essentially the same on your on-prem pfSense instance.
> 
> - Allow inbound traffic on port `51820/udp` on all of your WAN interfaces.
>   Should you use another port, ensure to follow through with it!
> - Make sure to actually *enable* the WireGuard service in the settings and set *Interface Group Membership* to *Unassigned Tunnels*.
>   This will give you more control over the tunnel rules.<br>
>   ![WireGuard Settings](images/pfsense-wg-settings.png)
> - Remember to set the allowed IP networks in the peer. These are the same on both ends of the tunnel. Further, generate a PSK here and copy it to the peer of the other instance. Since we create a site-to-site connection, it is recommended to have static peer addresses. It is highly recommended to use *publicly resolvable DNS entries here* instead of the IP addresses.</br>
>   ![WireGuard Peer setup](images/pfsense-wg-peer-setup.png)
> - Ensure to assign the interface in `Interfaces` / `Interface Assignments`</br>
>   ![pfsense-wg-if-assign.png](images/pfsense-wg-if-assign.png)
> - and set up the gateway correctly. The gateway is the address of the other instance (see [diagram](https://github.com/hetzneronline/community-content/tree/master/tutorials/vpc-with-wireguard-pfsense/images/vpc-network.png)). **Very important:** Set the [MTU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximum_transmission_unit) on both sides to a smaller value, [it is a good idea](https://keremerkan.net/posts/wireguard-mtu-fixes/) to start out as low as **1300** bytes. Set the same MTU on both ends of the tunnel.</br>
>   ![pfsense-wg-interface.png](images/pfsense-wg-interface.png)
> - When everything is set correctly on both ends, the tunnel should come up with a green handshake icon in the status page and a handshake time. Check if the tunnel is up on both instances.</br>
>   ![pfsense-wg-status-page.png](images/pfsense-wg-status-page.png)
> - **The crucial part** is to add our routes. You have to add the OnPrem segment via the OnPrem WireGuard Gateway on the VPC pfSense instance; and the route to the VPC segment via the VPC WireGuard Gateway on the OnPrem instance. Below the entry for our VPC pfSense instance</br>
>   ![VPC static routes](images/pfsense-wg-route.png)

Reviewer: "Overview" in line 214 and "Remarks" in line 227 kind of link together. I would suggest to add your comments directly to the individual steps for a better reading flow. For example:

```suggestion
Install the wireguard package on both pfSense instances.

In your pfSense web interface, go to `System` / `Package Manager` and select the "Available Packages" tab. Search for "WireGuard" and click on `+ Install`. After it is installed, follow the [official guide](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/wireguard-s2s.html); you will see the same addresses there. It is recommended to use an address segment outside our *Example Corp* network. Further, it is recommended to set up a [Pre Shared Key](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/vpn/wireguard/settings.html#wireguard-tunnel-settings).

To clarify the guide from pfSense, make sure to follow all steps on both of your pfSense instances. The following only shows the steps on VPC but they are essentially the same on your on-prem pfSense instance.

1. [Add firewall rules](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/wireguard-s2s.html#firewall-rules) to allow traffic on the wireguard interface
   
   Allow inbound traffic on port `51820/udp` on all of your WAN interfaces.
   Should you use another port, ensure to follow through with it!

2. [Enable WireGuard](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/wireguard-s2s.html#wireguard-configuration) under `VPN` / `WireGuard` / Settings
   
   Make sure to actually *enable* the WireGuard service in the settings and set *Interface Group Membership* to *Only Unassigned Tunnels*. This will give you more control over the tunnel rules.
   
   ![WireGuard Settings](images/pfsense-wg-settings.png)

3. [Add a tunnel](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/wireguard-s2s.html#tunnel-configuration)

4. [Set up a peer](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/wireguard-s2s.html#peer-configuration) (client) which "dials" into the other pfSense instance
   
   Remember to set the allowed IP networks in the peer. These are the same on both ends of the tunnel. Further, generate a PSK here and copy it to the peer of the other instance. Since we create a site-to-site connection, it is recommended to have static peer addresses. It is highly recommended to use *publicly resolvable DNS entries here* instead of the IP addresses.

   ![WireGuard Peer setup](images/pfsense-wg-peer-setup.png)

5. [Add interfaces and gateways](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/wireguard-s2s.html#assign-interface) - this should bring up the tunnel
   
   Ensure to assign the interface in `Interfaces` / `Interface Assignments`
   
   ![pfsense-wg-if-assign.png](images/pfsense-wg-if-assign.png)

   and set up the gateway correctly. The gateway is the address of the other instance (see [diagram](https://github.com/hetzneronline/community-content/tree/master/tutorials/vpc-with-wireguard-pfsense/images/vpc-network.png)). **Very important:** Set the [MTU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximum_transmission_unit) on both sides to a smaller value, [it is a good idea](https://keremerkan.net/posts/wireguard-mtu-fixes/) to start out as low as **1300** bytes. Set the same MTU on both ends of the tunnel.
   
   ![pfsense-wg-interface.png](images/pfsense-wg-interface.png)

6. [Set up static routes](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/wireguard-s2s.html#routing)
   
   **The crucial part** is to add our routes. You have to add the OnPrem segment via the OnPrem WireGuard Gateway on the VPC pfSense instance; and the route to the VPC segment via the VPC WireGuard Gateway on the OnPrem instance. Below, the entry for our VPC pfSense instance:

   ![VPC static routes](images/pfsense-wg-route.png)

7. Disable NAT translation

When everything is set correctly on both ends, the tunnel should come up with a green handshake icon in the status page and a handshake time. Check if the tunnel is up on both instances.

![pfsense-wg-status-page.png](images/pfsense-wg-status-page.png)

Deploy a test VM, setup the default route, install `iperf3` and test the tunnel's performance.
```

Author: Hi @svenja11 , the intention for `Remarks` is in reference to the Netgate WireGuard guide itself. I'd like to keep this separated therefore. However, my intention is not obvious I guess. 
Further, the `Overview` section is meant as an overview for the *whole* tutorial (it is actually part of the template, iirc). 

That said, I'd rather keep it separated. Do you have any suggestions to make this more clear?

Reviewer: Hi @helge000, I actually did understand that you wanted `Remarks` to be in reference to the Netgate WireGuard guide itself.

But I guess I did get the purpose of `Overview` wrong. Maybe because it is part of "Step 4". I thought, in this overview, you were just listing the different steps that the reader is supposed to follow in the Netgate WireGuard guide at [docs.netgate.com](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/wireguard-s2s.html). So this is how I thought it is structured:

> **Step 4 - Setting up WireGuard site-to-site connection**
> 
> Overview
> *- List of Netgate guide steps -*
> Follow the [official guide](https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/wireguard-s2s.html) ...
>
> Remarks
> *- Notes about the Netgate guide steps -*

So I thought it would make sense to combine it like this:

> **Step 4 - Setting up WireGuard site-to-site connection**
> 
> *- List of Netgate guide steps with your personal notes -*

---------------------

Usually, the `Introduction` at the top is used to give a brief overview over the different steps in the tutorial. So maybe that's why I didn't get that the overview in "Step 4" was also for the *whole* tutorial. If you want to leave it the way it is, just let me know and I will mark it as "ready".
